---
layout: post
title: Do NBA Referees Give an Advantage to the Home Team
subtitle: How Fouls and Point Differential Can Help us Assess 'Foul' Play by Referees
cover-img: /assets/img/refs.png
---


## Why Would the National Basketball Association Want to Give Home Teams an Advantage?
Each team in the NBA is currently valued at over 1 billion dollars. To put that number in perspective, if an NBA owner sold his team for that billion dollar vaule, the owner could buy The British Virgin Islands, and still have 500 million dollars left over. The National Basketball Association makes 20+ billion dollars from two television contracts alone with major networks ESPN and TNT. Millions of pieces of merchandise are sold each year, millions of dollars in ticket sales, millions in sponsorship deals, millions in concession costs, ect; the NBA is a money machine and any negative publicity can be deterimental to that revenue stream.

By now you might be asking yourself "I get the NBA makes a lot money, but why would referees want to give the Home Team an advantage?" My answer: In order for the NBA to negotiate high valued television contracts and fill stadiums with fans, it is in the best interest of the NBA Executives to have Home Teams win as many games as possible. Let me give you an example: this past season the Minnesota Timberwolves finished 3rd to last in NBA Standings, and were among the bottom five teams in Average Fan Attendance. Low ticket revenue, low concession revenue, low merchandise revenue, low parking revenue, everywhere category you look at there is low revenue. The citizens of Minnesota don't want to pay hard earned dollars for a game to watch their team lose. This doesn't just affect the Timberwolves revenue stream either, this impacts the league as whole. When the NBA has a nationally televised Timberwolves home game, and viewers (who don't normally watch the Timberwolves) see a half empty stadium, chances increase that they turn off game. This drives ratings down, makes it harder to negotiate television contracts for the NBA, makes it harder to get sponsors, and slowly we see the revenue stream dwindle down. Imagine you an National Basketball Association League Executive, and you notice that when the Home Teams lose, we as an organization lose money. Would it be in your best interest to try to 'fix' that? I think so, and it's public knowledge that some referees have already been caught doing this.

July 29th, 2008: the National Basketball Association had come under fire after long-term NBA Official, Tim Donaghy, was sentenced to 15 months in Federal Prison for consirpacy to engage in wire fraud and conspiracy to transmit gambling information. He was responsible for officiating 772 regular season games and 20 playoff games. While Mr Donaghy was convicted and served his time, there was still a hurricane of rumors that the state of the NBA was compromised at all levels. Donaghy never named other referees partaking, but he did allude to this being a prevalent issue. Rumors floated around about how the 2002 NBA Playoffs and 2007 NBA Playoffs both had been rigged by league executives. However, despite receiving the spotlight attention, nothing really happened. No further charges were brought to other officials, there was no investigation into whether the 2002 and 2007 playoffs had been rigged, everything just died away like a bad internet meme. This concerns me now more than ever because the Supreme Court recently passed a law making Sports Betting legal. For example, Rivers Casino in Chicago has just opened their online sportsbook, and it lets you bet directly from an app on your phone. As more people adapt to the gambling culture, it is more important now than ever that we try to address sporting events being rigged.

## Just How Rigged Can It Be?
cover-img: /assets/img/Screenshot (10).png
One column of data I was presented was Home Team Win% per official. 
118 out of 123 officials have Home Team Win% above .500 meaning over the season the majority of games they officiate the Home Team wins
95.9% of officials, something seems off to me.


## How Data Shows Referees Favoring Home Teams
  The 'foul' in the NBA is described simply as illegal personal contact with the opponent. Once a team accumaltes five fouls in a quarter (which is often), the opposing team is awarded a 'Bonus' consisting of two free freethrows and each foul after the fifth awards the team the same 'Bonus'. If you have ever watched the NBA, then you would know a foul could be called on every offensive attempt. It is nearly impossible to defend someone from dribbling to the hop for a layup without making some sort of contact. The league leaves it up to referee 'discretion' when to make the call. I hope you are beginning to see how this gray area causes problems.
  
  The foul also creates problems not related to 'Bonus' shots. Once a play commits six personal fouls in a game, they are considered to have 'Fouled Out', and no longer can play in the game. Imagine being the away team, and all of sudden in the first two minutes of the game your best player shockingly gets two quick fouls called on him. A smart coach would take his player out to make sure he doesnt foul out by the fourth quarter, when the game becomes important. What we as viewers should really be paying attention to is 'This road team just lost the player who scores the most points for them for the next few minutes of this game', and as a result suddenly the home team has a noticeable advantage until he returns. Or let's say the coach decides to leave that player in hoping he will be smart and not commit another foul. This player now has to play much less aggressive on defense once again giving an advantage to the other team.
  
  Now that I have painted the picture for the significane the foul in the NBA, let me show you some data collected about season averages for the way refs called fouls in 2019-2020. This data was obtained from https://www.nbastuffer.com/2019-2020-nba-referee-stats/ and they host many other datasets in regards to the NBA. Highly recommend checking out their datasets.

<iframe style="border-width:0" src="https://charts.sharpdesigndigital.com/lucas-fig22.html" width="750" height="800"> </iframe>

## The Key Takeaway
  In the figure above, we observe a referees season average for Foul % Against a Road Team and Foul % Against a Home Team. At first glimpse, it is encouraging to see that the majority of officials hover right around that 50% marker for how they call fouls, however; take a closer look. You will see the majority of data points above the 50% marker are Road Teams. Meaning that over the course of a season refs call more fouls against Road Teams than they do against Home Teams.
  Going back to what I said earlier, more fouls can give the other team a chance for the bonus or possible get an important player on the opposing team to sit for a while. Both of these circumstances lead to more points for the Home Team. When Las Vegas Sportsbooks set point spreads for NBA games, they generally fall into a point spread between 2.0-6.0, so even though the margin of difference in calls is small, it doesnt mean its not signficant. In fact those few extra fouls against the Road Teams resulting in either a 'Bonus' or an important player sitting for a few extra minutes, is all it takes for the Home Team to have a significant advantage. In the figure below, I demonstrate how even a marginal amount of extra fouls creates a serious change in point differential.

<iframe style="border-width:0" src="https://charts.sharpdesigndigital.com/lucas-fig1.html" width="960" height="680"> </iframe>

## How 1 Foul Can Change a Game
  In this figure, you will see a histogram describing two different distributions: Average Foul Differential and Average Home Team Point Differential. A positive Foul Differential in this case means the Home Team committed less fouls than the Road Team. With Foul Differential, we see a large portion of the distribution being centered between 0.0-1.0, leading us to believe that the referees do call fair games. How I refute that though is by looking at the Average Home Team Point Differential. Notice how even though the Foul Differential is small that is still heavily favors the Home Team scoring more points. The figure below my distrbitution plot makes this easier to see. As foul differential becomes ever so slightly greater, the Home Team Points Differential begins to skyrocket. All it takes is an extra foul or two against the Road Team, and it seems the Home Team seizes a victory.
